About:

In general, our project aims to predict the weather. This is so we can know whether a trail is safe to use for hikers. It goes without saying, but bad weather on a trail = bad news for a hiker. Bad weather includes rain, snow, and wind, which makes the trails hard to walk on. Some of the information (trail closure information) were obtained from the Facebook page of Ridge to Rivers, which is an organization that is invested in maintaining and preserving many of Boise's trails. One way they do this is through their website, which has many related features (interactive maps, trails rules, how to navigate trail usage through the winter and wet weather). Additionally, Ridge to Rivers uses data from the daily NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) forecast, which has soil moisture and temperature information. If these numbers fluctuate, it's likely that trails are muddy and have a hard time being accessed for that day. This is factored in when determining if a trail is safe to hike on.

For our project, information was scraped from the Ridge to Rivers Facebook page (November 2021-November 2023) and weather information from NCEI (National Centers for Environmental Information) from the Boise Airport Station (date, maximum temperature in F, minimum temperature in F, total participation in mm). The information NCEI is a seven day weather forecast, and it was exported to a csv file. All of this data was used in our machine learning model, and it was trained to predict trail conditions for a forecasted period. Hopefully you can see how this would be beneficial to the trail community, as knowing what to expect will be safer when planning a hiking trip.

The model itself is known as RandomForrestClassifier. It's a supervised algorithm that uses a random subset of the data to create decision trees. The predictions are aggregated from the individual trees, which determine the final result (average of individual predictions). It works well for our project since we deal with different data types. The specific data that is used to train the model is the date, max temperature (F), min temperature (F), and precipitation (mm). It's also trained to assign possible categories to trails: Avoid, Alternatives, All Weather, and Good Bets. Descriptions for each can be found here: https://www.ridgetorivers.org/etiquette/wet-weather-and-winter-trail-use/. In general, Avoid means to avoid the trail when conditions (weather) is minimal (due to high clay content), Alternatives are trails to use when conditions are muddy, All Weather means trails are good for almost every condition, and Good Bets are trails that are good to use when conditions are minimal. At the end of this training process, the trail is assigned a 0 or 1 (meaning it applies) for each category. It's important to note that trails can have more than one category assigned to them (two 1s). This model creates an API that is used in the user interface so it can accesses required data. Note: the model is trained to 68% accuracy.

The user interface was created based on the machine learning model, and allows users to select a date in the forecasted range to see what trail conditions will be like. Trails expected to be open during the selected date are displayed so the user knows which trails are expected to be accessible based on the current conditions. It goes without saying, but the trail's category values are used in this determination. This keeps it simple and easy to use.